
1. Sci Eng Ethics. 2017 Mar 9. doi: 10.1007/s11948-017-9886-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Questionable, Objectionable or Criminal? Public Opinion on Data Fraud and
Selective Reporting in Science.

Pickett JT(1), Roche SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Criminal Justice, University at Albany - State University of New
York, 135 Western Avenue, Albany, NY, 12222, USA. jpickett@albany.edu.
(2)School of Criminal Justice, University at Albany - State University of New
York, 135 Western Avenue, Albany, NY, 12222, USA.

Data fraud and selective reporting both present serious threats to the
credibility of science. However, there remains considerable disagreement among
scientists about how best to sanction data fraud, and about the ethicality of
selective reporting. The public is arguably the largest stakeholder in the
reproducibility of science; research is primarily paid for with public funds, and
flawed science threatens the public's welfare. Members of the public are able to 
make meaningful judgments about the morality of different behaviors using moral
intuitions. Legal scholars emphasize that to maintain legitimacy, social control 
policies must be developed with some consideration given to the public's moral
intuitions. Although there is a large literature on popular attitudes toward
science, there is no existing evidence about public opinion on data fraud or
selective reporting. We conducted two studies-a survey experiment with a
nationwide convenience sample (N = 821), and a follow-up survey with a
representative sample of US adults (N = 964)-to explore community members'
judgments about the morality of data fraud and selective reporting in science.
The findings show that community members make a moral distinction between data
fraud and selective reporting, but overwhelmingly judge both behaviors to be
immoral and deserving of punishment. Community members believe that scientists
who commit data fraud or selective reporting should be fired and banned from
receiving funding. For data fraud, most Americans support criminal penalties.
Results from an ordered logistic regression analysis reveal few demographic and
no significant partisan differences in punitiveness toward data fraud.

DOI: 10.1007/s11948-017-9886-2 
PMID: 28281156 

